---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: >-
  How your coffee is going to taste was determined before the beans were roasted
  by the nutrients in the soil, the varietal of the plant, the weather during the
  season, the aspect of the slope, the insects that nibbled at it, the method of
  processing and the skill and attention of the farmer who processed it.

  We'll explore agronomy in three sections: varietal, terroir and processing.
datePublished: '2016-03-17T21:31:25.742Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-17T21:30:47.684Z'
title: ''
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-17-how-your-coffee-is-going-to-taste-was-determined-before-the.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
url: how-your-coffee-is-going-to-taste-was-determined-before-the/index.html
_type: Article

---
How your coffee is going to taste was determined before the beans were roasted by the nutrients in the soil, the varietal of the plant, the weather during the season, the aspect of the slope, the insects that nibbled at it, the method of processing and the skill and attention of the farmer who processed it.
We'll explore agronomy in three sections: varietal, terroir and processing.

Arbitrary classifications
We come from a genus called homo, of which there are around 14 known species some of whom are pictured below. Our species is Homo sapiens.
Who's your daddy? Different species in the genus Homo.
Who's your daddy? Different species in the genus Homo.
The plants in the genus Coffea flower and bear fruit called cherries and inside these are coffee beans. Within Coffea there are 125 known species . The three that are most commonly consumed are arabica, canephora and liberica. The speciality industry only uses a small percentage of the arabica species. Within each of these coffee species are varietals, which are like the difference between Chinese and Japanese - there is a difference, but it's often difficult to pin-point what, especially when interbreeding is common. So varietals are the many 'races' of coffee. Farmers mostly select varietals with good yield and pest resistance and not for good taste. Most farmers are as interested in the flavours possible in the cup, as a rubber farmer in the natural feel of your Durex Featherlight. The coffee farmer has got some land and he wants to make as much money out of that land as possible, which usually means as much fruit to come off that land as possible. If a low-yield plant produces great tasting coffee; financially, the only point of growing it is if people will pay more for his entire harvest than if he grew the higher yielding plants. And that only works if there are enough consumers prepared to pay higher prices for less coffee. And if a pest doesn't wipe out half of his plantation.
Varietals
There are many hundreds of varietals and cultivars of arabica. The distinction is that cultivars mate with human persuasion and varietals are naturally frisky. Most varietals are in Ethiopia, Southern Sudan and parts of Kenya. From these hundreds of varietals, we took Typica and Bourbon that were growing in Yemen in the seventeenth century and spread them out across the colonial lands resulting in a remarkably small genetic variation across the globe.
How much difference do different varietals make to taste?
British were definitely more salty than Maori. But the taste of the Brits might have had more to do with a diet of ship biscuits and salted beef at the time (compared to the sweeter kumara and kereru) rather than genetics. Perhaps Brits and Maori taste quite similar now. More research is required.
And coffee? It can be difficult to say. If we have two varietals taken from the same terroir and processed the same at the same time, there are many more variables that will affect the flavour of the coffee. For example, if two varietals have different sized beans, should the two varietals still be roasted with the same profile in order to minimise variables?
Nevertheless, usually if different varietals are planted side by side, the cherries picked from the same varietals taste the same and there is a marked difference with the other varietals. This correlation is carried on to the cupping table. Indeed, the better tastingthe fruit, the better tasting the coffee.
Most varietals are fairly similar in flavour and yet others are strikingly different in flavour, such as geisha (one of the original coffees cultivated in Ethiopia and rediscovered only recently) and the pacamara (a cultivated varietal selected from pacas and maragogype).
For most of the industrial era of coffee, most growing regions typically grew only a couple of varietals. This led to the widespread misunderstanding that coffees from a continent have specific cup qualities. This is true only to a very limited extent. Since the 1960s many farmers and enthusiasts have been smuggling cherries of weird and wonderful varietals out of Ethiopia and the resulting mix of flavours from single estate lends credence to the trend of ordering your brew by estate and varietal rather than by country.
The ability to be able to buy green beans as single varietals is recent. There are still many farmers around the world who have no idea what varietal they grow or whether there are many varietals on their farm. Even if they did have one varietal, it mightn't be possible to keep that varietal separate from others during processing. Single origin doesn't necessarily mean single varietal. The recent growth in speciality coffee and, more pertinently, higher prices, gave many farmers the incentive to separate zones of their farms for different varietals.
Most roasters begin to develop favourite varietals from different estates. Sometimes though, through some trick of the weather, we're wrong and this year's Mundo Novo from an estate in Carmo de Minas might outperform the exceptional Bourbon of last year.
It seems that the SL28 varietal, common in Kenya, picks up higher quantities of phosphoric acid from the soil than Ruiri 11\. It also seems that the the SL28 is the more pleasantly sweet of the two. Of course, for the coffee beans to have the phosphoric acid, the soil needs to have orthophosphates in it. Location has a large part to play in the flavour of coffee, but not the regional Central America or Asia. Specifically it is the East facing mountainside with minimum year round temperatures and the good rain early on this season. This is the domain of terroir.

Terroir comes from the French and their affliction with wine. It is what the place gives the plant and encompasses the geographic, geological and climatic conditions that will impart unique characteristics to the product. It's a term that is being used with high-end cocoa, hops, grapes, coffee and marijuana.
Just as Champagne claims to have particular terroir attributes that can make you uniquely tipsy, Estates in Tarrazu, Heliodora, Antigua and many other regions make claims for their coffees based on their shared topography, altitude, soil type and surrounding vegetation: our valley is better than that valley, so buy us.
The topography may contribute to the flavours by forcing a predominant wind direction, proximity to mountains, lakes, valleys. The lay of the land may lead to natural runoff of excess water or may force a particular micro-climate. The climate is determined in part by the local topography, but also surrounding vegetation, distance from the ocean, altitude. Soil type is greatly dependent on plate tectonics and former vegetation: If the land once sat below the ocean and had a great weight in sediment pressing upon it and many thousands of years of vegetation, it would have a very different mineral composition from land formed from recent volcanic activity.
Shade
Shade is most important for the development of coffee at lower levels where the temperatures are higher. Coffee that is grown in areas that get a lot of cloud or in cooler areas/higher heights don't actually benefit so much from shade. The greatest benefit of shade is not for the flavours in your brew, but for the flavours of fauna that may continue to cohabit with the coffee.
Altitude
Coffee is commonly considered better if the altitude is higher. However, it's the temperatures that are important, rather than the air pressure . Arabica grows best at 15ºC-25ºC (59ºF-77ºF) it can grow outside this range, but will be severely damaged at temperatures below 0ºC. Generally the best temperatures are found at high altitude around the equator descending to sea level at around 23º latitude. Even this rule is rough: I've roasted and drunk coffee grown on the Galapagos island of San Cristóbal at 0.8ºS and grown at 140-360m that was delicious. Some excellent coffee is grown in Hawaii at 19--21°N grown at 0-610m. In both islands, the microclimate creates the environment perfect for growing quality coffee.
Nutrition
Most studies on nutrient deficiency have focussed on the health and yield of the plants and assumed that a healthy plant means good tasting coffee. Considering the coffee these guys were likely drinking, that's a generous assumption. Many papers show that deficiency in any nutrient will hinder yield. Fewer papers have gone as far has boiling the kettle and polishing the cupping spoon.
Some recent papers have looked at the affect of nutrients on cup quality . However, much of the research is conflicting and seems to be site specific suggesting that the relationship between the nutrient availability and the cup quality is a complex relationship. These paper tease out correlations, but none of the research really pulls out enough to establish a causal relationship. The current and available research suggests there are more important things for the cup quality than proximity to a volcano.
In 1997 the Kenya Coffee Research Foundation added phosphoric acid to Colombian coffees in similar levels to that present in SL28\. They found that the Colombian coffees mimicked the sweetness and many of the flavour characteristics of the SL28 varietal, Kenyan coffees.
Fertiliser
Coffee evolved in natural forest habitats with the leaf litter of other plants, as well as its own, supplying the necessary nutrients for it to thrive. The shade conditions prevented excessive flowering, which meant it didn't evolve the ability to shed excessive fruit load as many other perennial woody plants do. Coffee plants just keep growing the fruit, depleting the tree's reserves, and deal with the consequences next year. In order to cope with the unnatural quantities of fruit that commercially grown trees produce and the loss of nutrients from the harvested cherries they need extra nutrients provided by fertiliser.
Plants take their nutrients from the soil. They don't discriminate between mulched cherry pulp and leaves or commercial fertiliser. We might fret about how organic something is, but plants just need nitrogen in the form of NH4+ or NO3- and research suggesting that they prefer the owner's manure to bags of fertiliser is inconclusive. There is, however, research that suggests that using organic fertiliser favours various microorganisms, which help to control root disease and increased bean size. Then again, use of mulch can also lead to a potassium/magnesium imbalance that can lead to a loss of acidity\\ (Lambot and Bouharmont, 2004).
One tonne of green coffee beans produces 2.7 tonnes of fresh pulp, which can be used as organic fertiliser. However, that same 2.7 tonnes could be provided using 70kg of commercial fertiliser . Although the organic fertiliser is available and free, the application isn't. It's much cheaper and quicker to pay someone to scatter 70kg of granules, than get the people and equipment to compost and spread 2700kg of mulch.
In irrigated crops, it's possible to add fluid fertiliser to the system in a process termed fertigation. The dissolved nutrients can be immediately taken up by the trees and can be easily applied over vast areas.
Commercial fertiliser also has its problems. Many farmers who saw the light and began using commercial fertiliser pre-2006 were blinded by the increased cost when the price rose 100% 2006 to 2008\. The ingredients of the fertiliser bags are subject to the same commodity fluctuations as the price of coffee and a farmer buying fertiliser and selling coffee has exposed herself to both.
Excessive use of fertilisers may negatively affect the flavour of the coffee - excess potassium may lead to harder beverages and too much nitrogen leads to bitter coffee.
According to Van der Vossen (2005), coffee production systems can only be ecologically sustainable if nutrients are replaced by a combination of organic and inorganic fertilisers.
Fertiliser is unlikely to be a health issue for us drinkers. If you're looking for something to fear from coffee, you're better off looking at insecticides.
Insecticides, fungicides, homicides
Due in a large part to inbreeding worse than the Saudi Royal family, coffee has been hit hard by pests and disease.
Caffeine is an insecticide. It's not dangerous to humans except at very high doses and instead has positive physiological results. Nevertheless, more that 900 species of pesky coffee consumer attack coffee. Most originate in Africa and that's where they've stayed. Some originate in the countries where they've been introduced and the majority of pests that have spread out throughout the coffee growing world got there with the shipping of green beans, which they attack.
Pests and diseases damage the roots systems, trees, flowers and cherries and may cause the death of the tree, reduced yield and impaired coffee quality. ISO 10470: 2004 defines three classes of defect resulting from pests and disease and as these add up, the farmer's earnings subtract.
The most important pests and diseases that damage the fruit are: coffee berry borer (CBB), coffee berry disease (CBD) and the Antestia bug.
Originally from Africa, the CBB has spread throughout the coffee growing world except Papua New Guinea and Nepal . The female will enter a cherry and bore into the seed where it will lay an average of 74 eggs. Once hatched, the hungry little larvae eat through the seeds and mate with their siblings inside the berry. The holes left by the CBBs are often infected by bacteria and fungi. The bored berries weigh less, reduce the grade of the beans and adversely affect the flavour of the roasted beans. The ICO reckons that CBB costs farmers USD 0.5 billion every year.
CBD is a fungus that causes cherries to drop early if it infects the tree at an early stage during the berry cycle. Although it is currently limited to Africa, it is likely to have a severe impact on high grown coffee if it manages to spread there.
Antestia bugs feed by piercing the cherry skin, this provide access for fungi and bacteria leading to rotten beans (floaters), brown beans and black or partially black beans. The Antestia bug is the likely transmitter of the bacterium behind the potato blight that affects many Rwandan and Burundian coffees.
There are many diseases that indirectly affect the production and flavour of coffee by attacking the roots, flowers, leaves and trunk of the tree. Of these the most important is coffee leaf rust (CLR).
CLR is caused by a fungus. It infects leaves and often causes them to fall. In moderate cases, the resulting fall in energy supplied by fewer leaves restricts the growth of new stems and subsequent crop yield will decline. The weakened tree is also more susceptible to secondary diseases. When too many leaves fall, the leaf to cherry ratio is too small to supply the appropriate nutrients to the cherries leading to poor cup quality and possibly causing the cherries to drop.
In severe cases CLR causes overbearing dieback where the plant sacrifices roots and shoots in order to continue supplying the cherries with the nutrients they need. Repeated dieback will kill the tree, but the crop may become uneconomical for the farmer long before then.
Crops in Sri Lanka were wiped out in the late 1800s resulting in supplanting with tea. Farmers have attempted to bred cultivars to be resistant to CLR. The Kents cultivar was introduced into India and Africa and worked well for a while. However, the fungus mutated and new virulent strains attacked the formerly resistant Kents cultivars in Africa. Many attempts have been made to breed resistant coffee resulting in numerous cultivars. However, these plants are not bred for their hints of candied apricot and sugarcane sweetness. One of the problems for the speciality industry is that many CLR resistant cultivars are poor cupping cousins to the more susceptible varietals they replace as with Ruiru 11 in Kenya supplanting the excellent SL28\.
An excellent resource for all things pestilent and disease inducing is: http://www.plantwise.org/KnowledgeBank/home.aspx
Pest and disease management
Management in this title sounds like a euphemism for killing, but predators and parasites are part of the natural cycle of things and can be 'managed' without extreme prejudice. Pests are flora and fauna that conflict with our interests. Michael Gehrken's excellent plantation in Tanzania is proud home to several prides of lions, a babbage of elephants, a trash of buffalo and a zoo of other animals. A leopard, with a serious case of the munchies, once killed and stole his pet doberman from the kitchen and disembowelled his horse. Despite all that he produces great coffee from his Blackburn Estate. Plantations and fauna can co-exist. There's even space for pests in limited numbers.
One of the problems with blanket spraying of poisons is the 'collatoral damage' of the natural enemies of pests, which may make populations more vulnerable to future attack. Poisons have a place in management of pests, but use of shade, trapping, parasites and predators are also methods of control that don't risk residue and are less likely to upset the biological balance.
Pesticides generally improve coffee quality by eradicating pests that would damage the crop. However, some pesticides can get into the coffee beans and may also affect the flavours of the coffee. Organochlorine pesticides that were used to control for CBB have been banned due to potential toxic residues in the beans and the damage to the environment.
The greatest fear of consumers concerning poisons is that they will be absorbed by the coffee beans and splash into the cup that you're drinking.
It's hard to quantify the affect that terroir has on the flavour of the plant. Taken to an extreme, feeding a plant clay in a basement without light will somewhat stunt its opportunities to thrive. Terroir, as a term, is broadening to include the varietals used and what happens at the farm after harvest. But I prefer to keep the distinction and refer to the post-harvest as processing.